# Political Choices in Contemporary Quebec

### Quebec's Political Status Within Canada

* Referendum on sovereignty-association *(1980)*
  * Objective
    * Quebec would be an independent state *(autonomous from Canada)* *(Political)*
    * Maintain economic ties with Canada *(Economic)*
  * Federal government's perspective
    * Federal government did not want Quebec to become a sovereign state.
    * Proposed [renewed federalism](#renewed-federalism).
  * Result
    * Defeat *(40.4%|59.6%)*
    * Quebec did not separate from Canada
    * Constitutional negotiations could resume
* Patriation of the Constitution *(1982)*
  * Previous meetings failed
    * Federal government wanted to [unilaterally](#unilateral) patriate the constitution.
      * Failed because the provinces were against this decision.
  * Consensus
    * 9 provinces agreed to patriate the constitution and an amendment formula.
    * Quebec was not invited to the negotiations and did not sign the constitution.
  * *Constitution Act* *(April 17, 1982)*
    * Queen Elizabeth came to Ottawa and signed to officially patriate the constitution.
  * Quebec's position in Canada
    * Quebec's status in Canada was not defined, since the province did not sign the constitution.
* *Meech Lake Accord* *(1987)*
  * PM Mulroney wanted to include Quebec in the constitution.
    * Wanted to reconcile with Quebec, who was under new leadership *(Liberal|Robert Bourassa)*
    * Agreed to resume negotiations to include Quebec in the constitution.
  * Five conditions Quebec demanded to include them in the constitution.
    * Quebec would be recognised as a distinct society.
    * Quebec would have the right to veto any constitutional amendments that could affect their rights.
    * Provinces had to right to withdraw from any federal program that interfered with their jurisdictions.
    * Quebec would have more power to appoint judges to the Supreme Court of Canada.
    * Constitution would grant Quebec power in the area of immigration.
      * Full control over immigration in the province.
  * Issues in Canada
    * All other provinces had to unanimously agree to Quebec's demands.
  * Result
    * Two provinces did not approve the *Meech Lake Accord*.
      * Manitoba
        * As First Nations had not been consulted or recognised during the constitutional discussions.
      * Newfoundland
        * Did not vote after it failed in Manitoba
* *Belanger-Campeau Commission* *(1990)*
  * Goal
    * Discuss Quebec's political and constitutional future.
  * Recommendations
    * Re-define Quebec's political status
    * A referendum on sovereignty-association to be held
      * To put pressure on the federal government to come up with new constitutional proposals.
* *Allaire Report* *(1991)*
  * Goal
    * Examine the possible solutions if constitutional negotiations failed once again.
  * Demands
    * More political autonomy for Quebec
    * If not granted, Quebec should hold a referendum on sovereignty-association.
* *Charlottetown Accord* *(1992)*
  * Quebec's distinct society would be recognised in the new constitution.
  * Referendum were held to get Canada's opinion
    * Canadians were asked to give their opinion on the Charlottetown Accord.
    * Results
      * Defeat *(45.7%|54.3%)* in Canada
      * Defeat *(43.3%|56.7%)* in Quebec
        * Intended a referendum on sovereignty-association in the near future instead.
    * Founding of the *Action démocratique du Québec* *(ADQ)*
      * New political party created by Jean Allaire to compete with the Liberals in Quebec.
* Quebec Independence Referendum *(1995)*
  * Cause
    * Failure of the *Charlottetown Accord* *(1992)*.
    * Some Quebecers wanted to have a referendum on sovereignty.
  * PQ and *Bloc Quebecois*
    * Parti Quebecois won the provincial election in 1994.
      * Under Premier Jacques Parizeau.
    * Bloc Quebecois formed the official opposition of the Liberal Party of Canada in the House of Commons *(Federal party that supported sovereignty)*.
  * Consensus
    * Parti Quebecois, Bloc Quebecois and ADQ supported the independence of Quebec.
    * Liberal Party of Quebec and Canada and the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada opposed the independence of Quebec.
  * Results
    * Defeat *(49.42%|50.58%)*
  * Aftermath
    * Sovereignty movement slowed down and the federal government negotiated terms with Quebec to try and include them in the constitution.
    * Quebec has still not signed the constitution.
      * Because their demands have not been met.
  * *Clarity Act* *(2000)*
    * Jean Chretien questioned the legality of Quebec separating from Canada in the Supreme Court.
      * Supreme Court said that Quebec was within its right to hold a referendum on sovereignty, as long as the question asked was clear.
      * The House of Commons has the power to decide whether a proposed referendum question was considered clear before public vote.
    * Majority of votes had to be 50%+ in order for sovereignty process to begin.

### Indigenous Rights

* *Constitution Act* *(1982)*
  * Section 35 recognised the ancestral rights of Indigenous people in Canada.
    * Indigenous people were defined as *Indian, Inuit and Metis*.
    * Called on the courts to ensure that the ancestral rights and land rights were respected.
* *Bill to Amend the Indian Act* *(C-31)* *(1985)*
  * Indian Status
    * First Nations women married to non-First Nations mem were given their and their children's Indian status back.
  * Enfranchisement
    * Enfranchisement clauses eliminated from the *Indian Act*.
  * Bands
    * Bands could determine their memberships.
      * Bands were comprised of chiefs and band councillors of a specific nation.
* Recognition of Indigenous Nations by the Quebec government *(1985)*
  * Allowed Indigenous people to negotiate agreements with the Quebec government on six rights
    * Right to autonomy in Quebec
    * Right to preserve their cultures, languages and traditions
    * Right to own and manage land
    * Right to manage wildlife resources in their (hunting and fishing) territory
    * Right to participate in Quebec's economy, economic development and profit from it
    * Right to develop as distinct nations, with their own identities
* Oka Crises *(1990)*
  * Mohawk of Kanesatake opposed a construction project and expansion of a golf course on Mohawk claimed territory (burial grounds)
  * A group of Mohawk, called the Warriors, set up a roadblock between Kanesatake and Oka
  * Provincial police got involved in the situation, with one being killed by friendly fire.
  * Mohawk of Kahnawake blocked access to the Mercier Bridge, as a sign of solidarity.
  * The Canadian army was called in to deal with the situation, leading to many months of conflict and arrests between the two groups.
  * Eventually, both development projects were cancelled. 
    * However, this lead to increased tension between Indigenous groups and the federal gov’t, as land claims and ancestral rights were called into question.
* *Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples* *(1991)*
  * To study relations between Indigenous peoples, the federal government and Canadian society.
    * Need to find solutions to problems between the groups.
    * Commission was proposed of four Indigenous members and three non-Indigenous members.
  * Recommendations
    * Indigenous people should be able to participate in the creation of policies that affect them.
    * The powers necessary for the right to self-determination.
  * Very few of the recommendations were implemented.
* Creation of Nunavut *(1999)*
  * Third territory in Canada.
  * 85% population are Inuits.
  * Governed autonomously.
    * First time a country changed its borders at the request of an Indigenous group.
* *Peace of the Braves* *(2002)*
  * Agreement between Cree and Quebec government to facilitate the creation of hydroelectric, forestry and mining developments in Quebec.
    * Cree would receive CAD70 million per year until 2052.
    * Government was granted permission to develop hydroelectric projects on their territory.
    * Promote economic development in the region
    * Encourage the development of Cree business in the region
    * Recognised Cree's ancestral rights to the land
* *Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada*  *(TRC)* *(2008)*
  * To inform all Canadians about what Indigenous children endured in residential schools.
  * Testimonies were heard from over 6000 First Nations, Inuits and Metis that attended the residential schools as children.

### International Relations

* Canadian participation in world organisations
  * To play an active role in trying to solve global issues *(climate change, national conflicts, poverty)*.
  * United Nations
    * Canada sends soldiers for peacekeeping mission around the world
      * Haiti
      * Rwanda
  * Other organisations
    * NATO
      * (Military) alliance of 28 countries.
      * Attack on one NATO member means an attack on all NATO members.
    * G7
      * Common ground on global issues
    * G20
      * Ensure the stability of financial markets and promote economic cooperation
* Threat of terrorism
  * September 11, 2001
    * Canada joined the war against terrorism and al-Qaeda (with the US).

# Definitions

#### Renewed Federalism

Consider the demands of Quebec with regard to their status in Canada.

#### Unilateral

Making a decision without consultation *(of the provincial governments)*.