# Economic Choices in Contemporary Quebec

### 1980s Recession and Impact

* Economic recession -> fewer exports to the US.
  * Sectors of the economy
    * Primary sector in decline
      * Many companies closed operations and people lost their jobs.
    * Secondary sector in decline
      * Many companies closed operations and people lost their jobs.
    * Tertiary sector growing
      * More job opportunities in the service sector (financial services, business services, telecommunications).
  * Unemployment rates increased by nearly 9% *(1973-1983)*
    * Decreased purchasing power.
    * Decrease in consumption of goods and services.
  * Mortgage *(interest)* rates increased from 17% to 20%.
    * People could not afford their homes and were forced to give them to the bank.
* Funding of social programs
  * Welfare state -> government finances social programs
  * Forced the provincial government to go into debt in order to pay for the programs and services that they had to provide to the population.
    * Unemployment rates increased -> less tax revenue for the government to spend on programs and services.
  * Perspectives
    * *(Some Quebecers believe that)* the government should increase corporate taxes to finance government programs and services.
    * *(Some Quebecers believe that)* the government should reduce funding for social programs and intervene less in the economy.
* [Neo-liberalism](#neo-liberalism)
  * Budget cuts to reduce debt -> privatisation of crown corporations.
    * Air Canada and Petro Canada shares were sold to reduce debts for the federal government.
      * Reduced the number of public sector employees and their wages and benefits.
  * Privatisation of certain services by the provincial government.
    * Private health care sector emerged.
    * Quebecers with financial means could now pay for faster access to health care by going to private clinics.

### Globalisation of The Economy

* Free trade agreements
  * Goals
    * Increase exports
    * Have access to new markets and products
    * Trade with no restriction (tariffs).
  * *Canada - United States Free Trade Agreement* *(CUSFTA)* *(1988)*
    * Eliminated custom duties on most products between the two countries.
  * *North American Free Trade Agreement* *(NAFTA)* *(1992)*
    * Signed in 1992, enforced in 1994.
  * Consequences for the economy
    * Increase in exports
    * Canada competes in the global market
    * Quebec's industries could now sell products and services to foreigners.
      * Puts Quebec on the global market.
    * Acceleration of globalisation
      * Quebec and Canada are now exposed to new markets and competitors worldwide.
* Impact of globalisation
  * Economy
    * Competition among countries
      * Countries can sell similar at varying prices.
    * Delocalisation
      * Many businesses relocated their plants and factories to countries with lower production and operation costs *(no minimum wage and price of materials)*
        * Less job opportunities for Quebec and Canada's citizens.
        * People are underpaid and exploited in other parts of the world.
* Quebec Inc.
  * Goal
    * Develop small-medium sized businesses in Quebec and provide job opportunities for its citizens.
    * To counter the effects of delocalisation in the province.
      * Ex: Ubisoft
  * Merging of companies
    * Many Quebec businesses merged in order to maintain their competitiveness on the global market.
      * Ex: SNC-Lavalin

### The Economy And Social Justice Movements

* Emergence of [civil society](#civil-society) groups.
  * Denounced globalisation (and its effects) and neo-liberal ideas.
  * *Act to Combat Poverty and Social Exclusion* *(2002)*
    * Find solutions to the increase in social inequalities in Quebec (gap between the rich and the poor had increased).
  * *Social Solidarity Program* *(2007)*
    * To provide financial assistance to people who could not work.
* Social economy projects
  * To develop a sense of community and create quality jobs for communities experiencing economic and social difficulties.
  * Benefits to the economy
    * Created sustainable jobs for people that often found themselves unemployed.
    * Fight poverty and social exclusion (for people with criminal records).

### [Devitalisation](#devitalisation) of Communities

* Causes of devitalisation
  * Weak economic activity
  * Aging population with low levels of education and low income
  * Many people on unemployment insurance or social assistance
  * Decrease in the labour force
    * Provincial government has stepped in to try and stimulate the economy by providing financial support (ex: Murdochville).
* [Single-industry towns](#single-industry-town)
  * Economic recession in single-industry towns
    * Closure of mines or industries
    * Depletion of a resource or the decision to stop exploiting resources
    * Solution: diversification of economy
      * Less dependence on a single industry.
  * Migratory movements
    * Youth in small communities have to leave for better education and employment opportunities.
  * Local services
    * Combination of a declining population and aging population will result in the closure of many local services (schools, stores, restaurants, etc. ).
  * Declining political weight in these regions
    * Combined many communities into one large region for provincial elections.
    * Eliminated some political districts due to low population.
* Issues for new farmers
  * Farming income depends on climate, making it a financial risk for new farmers.
  * More profitable to sell rural land than to transfer it to a young person who would like to take it over.
  * Cost of farmland has increased rapidly; making it more difficult to take loans from banks to purchase the land.

# Definitions

#### Neo-liberalism

Current of thought that challenged state intervention in the economy and society, promotes free competition and privatisation. 

#### Civil Society

Individuals who are not political decision-makers.

#### Devitalisation

Socio-economic phenomenon by which a city or municipality simultaneously experience a declining and aging population, fewer investments and local services are available, youth are leaving for bigger cities. 

#### Single-industry Town

A town whose economy depends on the exploitation of a natural resource by one or a few companies (only one real economic activity).