# Social Choices in Contemporary Quebec

### Aging Population in Quebec

* Aging population
  * Falling birth rate (smaller families, women are in the workforce).
  * Rising number of seniors (aging baby boomers)
* Aging population and life expectancy
  * Consequences for the labour force
    * Too many retired people that cannot be replaced in the labour force.
  * Consequences for public services
    * More money being spent on health care services
  * Government spending increased
    * Obligation of being a welfare state
    * Need to take care of senior population

### Family Policy And Immigration

* Measures to increase the population: *the family policy*.
  * Child support through a tax credit
  * Promoting a work-family balance through various measures (aid maternity and paternity leave).
  * Subsidised child care services
  * Financial support (for low-income families)
  * Measures for families with special needs.
* Immigration policy
  * Since 1980, the population of Quebec increased the fastest through immigration.
  * *Let's Build Quebec Together* *(1990)*
    * Policy on immigration and integration that presented Quebec as:
      * Society in which French is the common language of public life
      * Democratic society where participation and contribution of all are expected and encouraged.
      * [Pluralist](#pluralist) society that ensures respect for fundamental democratic values.
  * *Canada-Quebec Accord on Immigration* *(1991)*
    * Quebec as its own criteria for selecting immigrants
    * Integration of new immigrants (French courses)
  * Protection for immigrants
    * Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
  * *Together We Are Quebec*
    * Establish more effective practices for selecting, [francizing](#francize) and integrating immigrants, in order to participate in Quebec society.
  * Debate on religious neutrality
    * *Bouchard-Taylor Report* *(2008)*
      * Recommended prohibition of wearing religious symbols by state employees in positions of authority
      * Not implemented by the Charest government.

### Living Conditions For Indigenous Peoples

* Social Issues
  * Lower wages, increased unemployment *(compared to non-Indigenous communities)*
    * Difficult access to housing
    * Inability to have a healthy and balanced diet
  * Health and life expectancy
    * Significantly lower than non-Indigenous people
  * Socio-cultural issues
    * Trauma from residential schools and loss of family ties, cultural practices and traditional way of life
      * Increased mortality rate *(suicide)*.
      * Increased addiction
      * Sexual and physical abuse *(especially towards women)*.

### Gender Equality

* Tragedy at *Ecole Polytechnique* *(1989)*
  * Marc Lepine killed 13 female students and one employee.
  * Lepine then killed himself and left a letter stating that he had targeted feminist activists.
* *Decriminalisation of Abortion* *(1988)*
  * Only became free in 2008.
* *Family Patrimony Act* *(1989)*
  * Legal equality among couples united through marriage
    * All property and assets are divided equally
  * Equal division of property after divorce
* *Pay Equity Act* *(1996)*
  * Women earned an average of 30% less than men *(working the same job)*.
  * Businesses with 10 employees or more had to pay equal wages for jobs of equal value by 2001
    * 1/2 businesses had fulfilled this obligation *(2006)*.
    * 5/6 businesses had fulfilled this obligation *(2016)*.
* *Act Instituting Civil Unions and Establishing New Rules of Filiation* *(2002)*
  * New type of union allowing every couple, whether same-sex or opposite-sex, to form an official union.
  * Both partners have the same rights and obligations as couples united by civil marriage.
* *Act Respecting the Governance of State-Owned Enterprises* *(2006)*
  * Board of directors of crown corporations were composed of equal numbers of women and men by 2011.
    * 9/22 crown corporations had not reached 50% women *(2006)*.
    * All 22 crown corporations reached an average of 52% women *(2016)*.
* *Work-family Balance* *(2010)*
  * Governments and employees must find ways to ensure a better balance between the professional family responsibilities of workers
    * Subsidised child care centres
  * *Quebec Parental Insurance Plan* *(QPIP)*
    * Allow eligible workers can receive income replacement benefits when they take parental, paternity or adoption leave.

# Definitions

#### Pluralist

Open to a diversity of options and behaviours in a society.

#### Francize

Learn French and promote integration into Francophone environments. 