# Cultural Choices in Contemporary Quebec

### Langauge Issue

* Language of signage
  * *Bill 101* *(1977)* protects the French language.
    * All signage must be in only in French.
    * Children of immigrant parents must attend French schools.
    * Challenged in the Supreme Court for violation of freedom of expression. *(1988)*
      * Bourassa invoked the [override clause](#override-clause) with *Bill 178*.
      * *Bill 178* *(1988)*
        * All outdoor signage must be only in French, but indoor signage can have French and another language.
        * French must in a larger font than English.
  * *Bill 86* *(1993)*
    * Protests over Bill 178 by the Anglophone Quebecers
      * The United Nation Human Rights Committee rules that *Bill 178* violated the freedom of expression *(1993)*. 
    * All signage must have both languages but French must be visually predominant.
* Language of instruction
  * *Bill 101* *(1977)*
    * Children of immigrant families must attend French public school until the end of high school.
  * Loopholes: *bridging schools* and certificate of eligibility.
    * Bridging schools: parents registered their children in non-subsidised private schools for one year and could send their children to a public English school.
      * Bridging school loophole blocked *(2002-09)*
    * *Certificate of eligibility* *(2010)*
      * Minimum of 3 year attendance at non-subsidised English elementary school allows application for a certificate of eligibility.
      * The certificate eligibility grants the right to attend English public high school.
      * The provincial government has the say on the granting of certificates.
* Indigenous languages
  * Not recognised by Canada's constitution
    * Indigenous languages could disappear over time.
    * Indigenous communities reintroduced their language to the youth to prevent the extinction of their languag

### Cultural Industry

* *Politique Culturelle de Québec* *(1992)*
  * Promote Quebec culture worldwide.
  * Focuses on
    * Affirmation of cultural identity
    * Support for arts and creators
    * Citizen access and participation in cultural life
* Cultural crown corporations
  * *Conseil des Arts et des Lettres du Québec* *(CALQ)* *(1994)*
    * To support the dissemination of individual artists and organisations in Quebec, Canada and abroad.
  * *Société de Développement des Éntreprises Culturelles* *(SODEC)* *(1995)*
    * To promote and support the creation, production and influence of Quebec culture.
* *Mouvement Pour les arts et les Lettres* *(MAL)*
  * Despite the funding, many artists and writers still have difficulties making a living from their works.
  * Campaigned to increase funding for the CALQ to improve the living conditions of artists and writers. 
* Dissemination of culture worldwide
  * Quebec artists are given a platform to show their works.

### Information Society

* Growth of an [information society](#information-society)
* Increased internet use in Quebec
  * E-commence and social networks are moving towards a new standard.
* *Digital Cultural Plan* *(2014)*
  * To enable artistic communities to reap the economic benefits of the digital world and remain competitive in global markets.
* *Copyright Modernisation Act* *(2015)*
  * Internet providers and search engines send a notice of infringement to subscribers downloading copyright-protected content.
* Mass media and news
  * 24 hour news networks *(CBC and CTV)*
  * Concentration of mass media
    * Integrating old forms of mass media *(newspapers, radio, television)* with the internet.
    * Larger enterprises bought out smaller mass media outlets
      * Repeated content are distributed over different subsidiaries by enterprises to cut cost
      * Homogenisation of information
  * The Internet
    * The Internet eventually began to compete with news channels.
      * Through free real-time news sites.

# Definitions

#### Override Clause

Allowed the provincial government to not apply a section of the Canadian Charter of Rights and freedoms.

#### Information Society

Integration of technology into society.