# Environmental Choices in Contemporary Quebec

### State of the Environment

* *State of Quebec's Environment* *(1992)*
  * Goal: manage environmental problems
    * Progress: air and water quality, waste recycling
    * Problems: degradation of soil (acid rain), threat of extinction of certain species and contaminated waterways
* Monitoring environmental standards
  * To study the impact of human activity on the environment
  * Summary of Quebec's environmental laws since 1972
    * Maximum concentrations of pollutants
      * Requirements for wastewater disposal in waterways
      * Limits on resource exploitation
      * Limiting greenhouse gases
      * Technological standards to be respected for manufacturing equipment and processes

### Thinning of the Ozone Layer

* Increase in greenhouse gas emissions => thinning of ozone layer
  * Led to global warming
  * Provincial governments put measures in place to try and protect the environment
* *Quebec's Action Plan on Climate Change*
  * Goal: reduce green house gas emissions through actions in areas of health and public safety, energy, transportation, municipalities, industry, residual materials and agriculture
* Kyoto Protocol *(1997)*
  * Global agreement for all countries to reduce green house gas emissions and fight climate change
  * Canada ratified the Kyoto Protocol *(2002)*
    * Agreed to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions by 5.2% before 2012
  * Withdrew from the Kyoto Protocol *(2011)*
    * Could not meet the targets to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions.
  * *Paris Agreement on Climate Change* *(2015)*
    * Canada re-joined the fight against climate change.

### Resource Exploitation

* Oil
  * Trans-Canada Energy East pipeline
    * Environmental consequences: soil contamination and rise in greenhouse gas emissions from the exploitations of oil sands.
* Natural Gas
  * Issue with [shale gas](#shale-gas) exploitation => public protests
  * Oil and gas companies were given access to the property of landowners who refused to allow drilling on their land *(2016)*.
* Renewable energy
  * Hydroelectricity production increased (more dams).
  * Wind farms in Quebec

### Exploitation of Forests

* *Forest Regime* *(2001-2003)*
  * Observations
    * Too many trees were being cut down
    * Poor cutting methods were being used
    * Forest regeneration was not sufficient to compensate for the amount of cutting.
* *Sustainable Forest Development Act* *(2013)*
  * Forest operators now had to engage in dialogue with locals and consider the forests' other uses.
  * Promoted the preservation of ecosystems.
  * Forest exploitation was based on renewal (forest regeneration).
* *Act to Amend the Forest Act and Other Legislative Provisions Applicable to Forest Management Activities* *(2015)*
  * Reduced the amount of forest companies were allowed to harvest.

### Mining

* Issues: mine towns and unemployment
  * Devitalisation (ex: Murdochville and Scheffervile)
  * Heavy metal contamination of waterways, dust, noise
* *Plan Nord* *(2011)*
  * Reviving Norther Quebec's mining areas through foreign investment and construction of new roads by the Quebec government
  * Focused on areas that were not developed and rich in minerals (nickel, cobalt, iron...)

# Definitions

#### Shale Gas

Natural gas found in the ground trapped in rock.