# Population Movements

### Rural Exodus and Urbanisation

* Industrialisation => Urbanisation
  * Population growth in cities due to immigration.
  * Cities require large amount of workforce.
* Living conditions
  * Working class neighbourhoods
    * Close to factories
    * Air pollution
    * Small and unsanitary
    * Lack running water and sewers
    * High population density
    * Epidemics
    * High mortality rate
    * No indoor toilets
  * Quebec Provincial Board of Health
    * Study and try to prevent epidemics
    * Distribute information concerning hygiene

### Emigration to the US

* Second wave of emigration to the US.
  * Due to overpopulation in the farms.
  * People were attracted to the industry in US cities (such as Vermont, Massachusetts, Maine).
* Solution
  * Prevent emigration due to fear of decrease in French population by the Government and the Church.
  * Agricultural colonisation program (in Saguenay, Lac-Saint-Jean, Laurentides, Outaouais).
    * To solve unemployment and prevent emigration.
  * Negative impact on First Nations who occupied these territories.

### [Agriculturalism](#agriculturalism)

* Promoted values like family, catholicism, and French language.
* Honoré Mercier *(premier of Quebec)* promoted agriculturalism in Quebec.
  * Programs: Colonise undeveloped regions in Quebec.
    * Development of Laurentides and Outaouais
  * Worked with the Catholic Church
* Results
  * Still emigration to US.
  * Difficult conditions
    * Cleaning the land, harsh climate, low crop yields.

### Immigration

* Until 1867: Only from the British Isles
* 1867-1901: 1.5 million immigrants settled in the Dominion of Canada
  * Aggressive immigration program
    * Wanted to populate the west (Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba).
* Negative net migration.

# Definitions

#### Agriculturalism

Belief that rejected industry and valued farming and traditional values such as family.