# Presence of the Catholic Church

### Increase in Power

* Mgr. Bourget: increase the presence of Catholic Church in the 1840s.
  * By 
    * running charitable organisations.
    * being the framework for social life (parishes and priests)
    * running hospitals and schools
* [Ultramontanism](#ultramontanism)
  * Catholics should submit for all religions, moral, culture and politics questions.
  * Alliance with the Reformers:
    * The church gets the votes for the Reformers.
    * The Reformers gave control over education, hospital and orphanages.
* Control over social life
  * Educations, hospitals and events (such as holidays)
* Control over education
  * School Act (1841)
    * Established denominational(religious related) school system.
    * French Catholics and English Protestants go to different schools.
  * Classical Colleges
    * Pre-university study ran by priests.
    * Mainly liberal arts.
  * Council of Public Instruction (1856)
    * 4 protestants & 10 catholics
    * Department of Public Instruction abolished (1875)
      * Council of Public Instruction replaced the department (1875)
    * A superintendent is its head.
    * Contains catholic and protestant committee.

### Anticlericalism

* *Institut Canadien* in Montreal
  * Liberal ideas
  * Library with books banned by the church
  * Formed by group of young intellectuals and authors that published and promoted works in science, philosophy and law.
  * Newspaper: *L'Avenir*
* Resistance from the Catholic Church
  * Mgr. Bourget: Pastoral letters to the *Institut* ordering them to stop publishing their works.
  * Ultimatum: threat to excommunicate them.
    * Many moderate members obeyed the Bishop and left the *Institut*.
* *Institut* vs Church
  * Anticlericalism vs. Ultramontanism
  * The Pope intervenes (1868)
    * Excommunicated the members of the *Institut Canadien*
  * The *Institut* was shut down (1877). 

### [Survival Nationalism](#Nationalism of Survival)

* Characteristics of the French Canadian identity
  * Catholocism
  * Language and culture
  * Traditional way of life (farming)
  * Traditional household (mem are most important)
* Reminder that nationalism is **a sense of belonging to a nation with similar cultural characteristics**.

# Definitions

#### Ultramontanism

Political and religious doctrine according to which the catholic church exercises control in all spheres, particularly with respect to political power. (Absolute controlled social life.)

#### Nationalism of Survival

Nationalism stipulating that maintaining the Catholic faith and Church, French culture and language was essential to the cultural survival of French Canadians in North America. (Worried that your culture and identity is at risk of disappearing.)