# Role of Women and Culture in Quebec

### Role of Women

* Industrialisation => Increase in social inequalities.
  * Gaps between the rich and the poor increased.
  * Factory owners keep increasing their wealth.
  * Factory workers never see an increase in their salery.
* Call for social reformism
  * Society calls for changes to be made in order to solve social inequalities.
  * Demand for change
    * Women formed associations to try to improve their social rights.
* Birth of [feminism](#feminism) in Quebec
  * The Montreal Local Council of Women

### Legal Status and Sectors of Employment

* *"Women were considered minors in the eyes of the law."* (The BNA Act)
  * Women could not vote, run for office, make legal decisions without the permission from their husband or father.
* Evolution of women's rights to vote
  * Constitutional Act (1791)
    * Only property owners could vote.
    * Only some women had properties.
  * Reformers (Baldwin & Lafontaine) (1844)
    * Women could no longer vote (even if they owned property). (The right was revoked).
  * BNA Act (1867)
    * The rights were not restored.
* Feminist groups emerged in the province
  * Fighting for women's rights to higher education (university).
  * Women were not allowed to attend French Universities (because church).
  * Women were allowed to attend English Universities in Quebec (Mcgill) or the US.
* Employment opportunities for women
  * Rural Areas: farmer, housewife.
  * Urban Areas: factory worker, housewife, teacher.
  * Church: num, healthcare, education.

### Culture: Literature

* Quebec Patriotic Literary Movement
  * Founded by Casgrain
  * Literature that focused on the French Canadian identity and its preservation.
  * Survival Nationalism
* *Ecole Litteraire de montreal* (Literary school of Montreal)
  * Themes: Free style, no restrictions
  * Met at Chateau Ramezay
  * Opposition from the Church
    * They could not control what was being published.

### Literature and Art

* End of the 19^th^ century: growth of women's literature in Quebec
  * Use of peudonyms (fake names) to have their works published.
    * The church was not in favous of women publishing literature.
  * Published poetry, short stories and folle tales
* Quebec landscape art
  * Focus on rural areas (farms and churches)
  * Survival Nationalism

# Definitions

#### Feminism

Belief in gender equality and womens' rights.