# First Nations in the Dominion of Canada

### Treaties and Creation of Reserves

* Metis uprising => Government intervention
  * Objective: get the land from the Metis
* Issue for the Metis
  * Hunting and fishing territories were reduced
    * The government was trying to force the Metis to sign their land away from them.
  * Extension of the railway
    * The railway goes through Indigenous territory.
    * Many indigenous people were forced to move.
* Land Treaties
  * To put the Indigenous people on reserves;
  * And give them new hunting and fishing grounds;
  * In exchange for the legal rights to their land.
  * Land Treaties => Forced sedentarisation.
    * Change their way of life (form of assimilation)

### Catholic and Protestant Missions

* Oblote missionaries = Catholic
* Anglican, Presbyterian and Methodist missionaries = Protestant
* Objective of missions
  * To evangelise the Indigenous people.

### Residential Schools

* Founded by the missionaries
  * To assimilate the indigenous youth
* Type of education
  * Learning French or English (depends on the missionary);
  * with a Catholic or Protestant education;
  * to *civilise* the Indigenous people.
* Isolation of indigenous children
  * Remove them from their families, who taught them indigenous culture, values and beliefs.
  * Starvation, sexual abuse, physical abuse.

### Act of 1869 and Band Councils

* Indian Status
  * Proposed [enfranchisement](#enfranchisement) to the Aboriginals;
  * To assimilate the indigenous people
    * They hoped that the indigenous people will give up their culture and identity to receive the same rights as Canadians.
* *Act of Gradual Enfranchisement of Indians* (1869)
  * First Nation chiefs were replaced with band council.
    * Band councils have less power than chiefs, so they will not oppose the government.

### *Indian Act* (1876)

* To convince the first nations to enfranchise themselves by creating a series of laws that restricted their political and social rights in Canada.
* *"All Indians are ~~also~~ minors in the eyes of the law."*
  * Can't vote
  * Not allowed to leave the reserves (unless the Federal government allows them to).
* Indian Agents
  * Placed by the Federal government on all reserves in order to oversee their day-to-day activities.

# Definitions

#### Enfranchisement

Give a minor adult status. (Give the indigenous people the same rights as Canadians.)