# Macdonald and Mercier's Governments

### *National Policy* (1879)

* Historical context
  * Canada was going through an economic recession *(crises)* (1873 - 1878).
  * Macdonald was seeking to be elected as Canada's prime minister.
  * He created the *National Policy* to end the recession.
* Three Elements of *National Policy*
  * Increase custom duties to promote domestic trade (protectionalism).
    * Promoting the development of Canadian Industries.
    * Encouraged the growth of the domestic market.
      * To keep money in Canada
  * Extend the railway to the west to encourage trade between provinces.
    * Colonise more regions.
    * Access to more raw materials (lumber).
    * Job opportunities (when building the railway).
    * Larger economic unit & promote domestic market.
  * Populate and settle the west through immigration.
    * Encourage immigration from eastern Europe.
      * *Dominion Lands Act*
        * Free land and passage (to Canada).
        * Appeals to poor people.
        * The immigrants must develop their land and live in Canada permanently.
      * Encourage the development of the wheat industry.
        * Sell and export wheats to foreign markets.
        * Grow wheat to feed the Canadian market.

### Mercier's French Canadian Nationalism

* Situation for French Canadians in the Dominion
  * Little influence in Canada (minority).
* Political Issues outside of Quebec.
  * [Execution of Louis Riel](./14.md)
  * Closing of Catholic schools in Manitoba and New Brunswick.
* Mercier elected *(1887)*
  * Provincial Autonomy
    * Did not want the federal government to intervene in provincial affairs.
    * Wants to remove the power of disallowance.
  * French Canadian Nationalism
    * Promoting the French Canadian identity
  * Interprovincial Conference *(1887)*
    * Mercier organised a conference with the leaders of other provinces and demanded the federal government to
      * Remove the power of disallowance.
      * Respect provincial jurisdiction.
      * Share more tax revenue.
  * Decentralised government
    * Federal government accepted the demands of the provincial leaders to not interfere in provincial affairs.
      * Gave up the power of disallowance.
* Wilfred Laurier elected as the Prime Minister *(1896)*
  * First French Canadian Prime Minister.
  * Promote Canadian Identity (Nationalism)
    * Wanted to unite the English and French Canadians.
    * Wanted the people to feel an attachment to Canada instead of their previous mother country.