# Consequences of The Act of Union

### French Canadian Minority

* French Canadians are now the minority in population and the legislative assembly.
* Other disadvantages
  * Union of debts (Lower Canada has to pay some debts for Upper Canada)
  * English became the only official language in the Province of Canada
* Conditions for French Canadians
  * French Civil Law was kept in Lower Canada.

### Early years of the Province of Canada

* The Act of Union causes two new political parties to form.

  |             | Reformers ~~(*Lemons*)~~                                     | Conservatives *(Tories)*                                     |
  | ----------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
  | Composition | **Lower Canada**:<br />French Canadians members and few English Canadian members.<br />**Upper Canada**:<br />English Canadian Members | **Lower Canada and Upper Canada**:<br />English Canadian Members and **two** French Canadian Members. |
  | Support     | The professional bourgeoisie.                                | British business class.                                      |
  | Demands     | Establishment of [responsible government](#responsible-government).<br />Protect the rights of French Canadians. | No political change. (Currently they have influence over the institutions with appointed members.) |

### Alliance of Reformers *(1841)*

* Baldwin proposed an alliance to the reformers in Lower Canada.

  * To get a majority and implement [responsible government](#responsible-government)

  * Result of the alliance

    * 1841: Alliance between the Reformers in Upper and Lower Canada

    * 1842: Majority in the Legislative Assembly for the Reformers.

      *Responsible government was not implemented because UK did not want to give up control over the colony.*

  * Baldwin = Leader of the Reformers in Upper Canada.

  * Lafontaine = Leader of the Reformers in Lower Canada.

  * The French Reformers promised to:

    * Support any econimic legislation that benifitted English Reformers' businesses.

  * The English Reformers promised to:

    * Pass laws that protect French Canadian culture and identity.
      (Culture and language rights in the colony and the government.)

# Definitions

#### Responsible Government

A government in which the members of the Executive Council are chosen from amoung the members of the majority party in the Legislative Assembly.