# Economic Context and US relations

### Economic Policy

* The UK adopts a free trade policy in 1846.
  * British merchants wanted protectionism gone because
    * They can get better deals from other countries.
  * Consequences for the Province of Canada
    * The Province of Canada has to compete against other countries.
    * The Province of Canada lost guaranteed trading partners.
    * They needed to find a new trade partner.
* Reciprocity Treaty *(1854)*
  * A free trade agreement between the Province of Canada and the US. 
    * No custom duties on raw materials.
  * Because
    * Proximity to the US (close).
    * Access to raw materials in the US.
    * Access to a large market.
  * Consequences
    * Increase in job opportunities (agriculture and forestry).
    * Creation of new transportation networks (canals and railways).
    * Strengthened the economy of the Province of Canada.
    * Pushed towards industrialisation of the Province of Canada.

### Trade and Transportation

* Development of a domestic market
  * Increased trade within the colony.
  * Try to not depend on the US.
  * Benefits business owners in the colony (more moneh).
* Grand Trunk Railway
  * Made to facilitate transportation of good between the Province of Canada and the US.
  * Economic Benefits
    * Transport goods more efficiently (than canals).
    * Year-round transportation.
    * Access to a larger market (more moneh).
    * More jobs (more moneh).
    * Colonisation of new regions.

### US Civil War

* The North: against slavery.
* The South: pro-slavery.
* President Lincoln wants to abolish slavery.
  * 11 Southern States opt for [secession](#secession).
  * Confederate(South) vs Union(North).
* Britain remained "neutral" during the war.
  * They supported the South by giving them military access to the Province of Canada.
  * The Union threatened the Province of Canada with [annexation](#annexation).
* Increasing the cost of war for the UK (they had to send troops to defend the Province of Canada).
  * They do not want to spend money to defend Canada.

### US Relations *(1860s)*

* Economic consequences of the Civil War
  * Treaty of Reciprocity until 1866 (not renewed).
    * The Province of Canada needed to focus on the development of its domestic market and expand its borders.
  * Territorial consequences for the Civil War.
    * Threat of US expansion to the west
      * The Province of Canada had to purchase Rupert's Land from the Hudson's Bay company.
      * Or they could not expand their territory.

# Definitions

#### Secession

An action by which a portion of the population withdraws from a state in order to form another state.

#### Annexation

An action by which part or all of a state's territory comes under the control of another state (Take everything).