# First Phase of [Industrialisation](#industrialisation)

### New Mode of Production

* Industrialisation completely transformed how good were produced.
  * [Mechanisation](#mechanisation) replaced craftspeople.
    * Produce goods more efficiently.
    * Produce more goods (with assembly line).

### [Industrial Capitalism](#industrial-capitalism)

* Purchasing machines and opening large factories required major investments
  * Take loans from a bank.
  * Look for investors and pull their money.
* [Capital](#capital) + [Means of Production](#means-of-production) = Industrial Capitalism.
* Financed through entrepreneurs (primarily British).
  * New industrial sectors established
    * Food, lumber, textiles, iron/steel.

### Maritime Transportation

* First half of the 19^th^ century: canals.
  * Efficient way to transport goods in large quantities.
  * Access to new markets.
* Two most important canals
  * Lachine canal *(1825)*
  * Welland canal *(1829)*
* Improvements to canals: hydraulic power
  * Widen and deepen the canals to allow more and larger ships to travel.
  * Hydraulic energy (energy from the movement of water).

### Rail Network

* Advantages (over canals)
  * Year-round transportation
  * Faster
  * Development of railway industry (iron & steel).
  * Colonisation of new region
  * Access to raw material (lumber)
  * Access to larger market (more moneh)
* Before and after confederation
  * Before 1867: Grand Trunk Railway
    * Connected the Province of Canada with the US (Portland, Maine).
  * After 1867: ~~Grander Trunk Railway~~ Intercolonial Railway
    * Connected Quebec to Nova Scotia and New Brunswick. 

# Definitions

#### Industrialisation

The social and economic changes related to technological progress, which enables the transition from craftwork to the factory production of goods.

#### Mechanisation

The intensive use of machines to replace manual labour.

#### Capital

A sum of money or assets that a person or company can invest with the goal of making a profit.

#### Means of Production

The machinery, tools, factories, workers, etc., required to produce goods.

