# Forestry and Agricultural Industries

### Forestry

* Continued to expand during the 19^th^ century.
  * Because
    * Mechanisation and the expansion of the railway network.
  * Other sectors
    * Lumber industry
    * Pulp and paper industry (newspapers)
    * Ship building
* Lumber industry
  * Large demand for lumber due to the growth of cities.
  * Reciprocity Treaty *(1854-1866)*
    * No custom duties on raw materials.
    * Exports increased
* Pulp and paper industry
  * Large demand for newspapers.
  * Increase in the construction of pulp and paper mills.
* Logging Camps (station for transportation of logs in rivers)
  * Seasonal work for farmers.
  * Camps were located next to sawmills and rivers.
  * Poor working conditions (hours and safety).

### Agriculture Industry

* Reciprocity Treaty = high demand for agriculture products in Canada.

  * Because there were no custom duties on agricultural products
  * Increased exports (wheat).

* Crop diversification

  * Because more products provide access to larger markets (in the US).
  * New products: vegetables, fruits, oats, barley.

* Diary production = benefits for farmers.

  * Does not depend on weather (year-round production).
  * Required fewer employees.
  * Mechanisation were brought to rural areas (more production and more moneh).
  * Requires **oats** to feed livestock. 

* Mechanisation = Increased production

  | Farmers close to cities      | Farmers in rural regions     |
  | ---------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
  | Access to machines           | No access to machines        |
  | More production (more moneh) | Less production (less moneh) |

  * Seigneurial system abolished *(1854)*
    * Seigneuries sold to highest bidders. 
    * Territorial consequence
      * Colonisation of new regions.
