# The Quiet Revolution *(1960-1970)*

### Context

* Election of Jean Lesage *(1960)*
  * After the end of Union Nationale's term.
  * Under the slogan *c'est l'temps qu'ça change* (It's time for change.)
  * Objectives of the Lesage government
    * Modernise and develop Quebec
      * Construction of newer and improved infrastructure
    * State-provided essential services
* Emergence of a [welfare state](#welfare-state)
  * Secularisation of social services under progressive policies
    * The state took control of education and health care.
    * Clergy members were gradually replaced by secular staffs.
    * Reduced role of the clergy in Quebec's society.

### Development of the Welfare State

* Education
  * Correct deficiencies in education by implementing changes.
  * *Grand Charter of Education* *(1961)*
    * Compulsory school attendance until the age of 15.
    * Free public education
  * *Royal Commission of Inquiry on Education in the Province of Quebec* *(**Parent Commission**)* *(1963)*
    * Recommendations
      * High quality education
      * Accessible education for all classes in all regions
      * Promote co-education schools
        * Encourage education for females.
  * *Department (Ministry) of Education* *(1964)*
    * Established to control and regulate education.
  * Comprehensive Schools *(1965)*
    * Large buildings that could accommodate large amount of students.
    * General and Vocational programs.
* Health care
  * Goal of the Lesage government: **accessible health care for everyone**.
  * *Hospital Insurance Program* *(1961)*
    * Collaboration with the federal government
    * Quebecers could be hospitalised at no cost.
  * *Hospital Act* *(1962)*
    * Government took control of health care.
    * Hospitals need permits from the government to operate.
    * Hospitals are administrated by a board of doctors (instead of the clergy).
* Government [Pensions](#Pension)
  * *Caisse de Dépôt et Placement du Québec* *(1965)*
    * Financial institution that manages funds for public and private pensions.
    * Financed organisation and companies to stimulate the economy.
  * *Quebec Pension Plan* *(**QPP**)* *(1966)*
    * Compulsory public insurance plan for workers.
* Increase in civil servants (state employees) in Quebec
  * More jobs are created as the state intervenes in social services.
  * Secularisation of government bodies and systems needed secular employees.

### Affirmative Measures

* Economic Nationalism
  * State-driven economy through state controlled companies *(crown cooperations)* *(instead of private companies)*.
  * Francophone would control industries rather than foreigners.
    
    * Goal: Keep money in Quebec
* Some [Crown Cooperations](#crown-cooperation) Created between 1962 and 1965
  
    | Year | Crown Cooperation                                      | Objective                                                    |
    | ---- | ------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
    | 1962 | Société Générale de Financement (**SGF**)              | Finance companies to stimulate economy and generate jobs.    |
    | 1964 | Sidérurgie du Québec (**Sidbec**)                      | Process iron ore from Cote-Nord (Previously done by US companies.) |
    | 1965 | Société Québécoise D'éxploitation Minière (**SOQUEM)** | Promote Quebec's mineral potential and encourage the mining sector. |
    | 1965 | Caisse de Dépôt et Placement du Québec (**CDBQ**)      | Make pension funds yield a profit, contribute to economic development through financing organisations and companies. |
  * Complete nationalisation of hydroelectricity
    * The state bought most private electricity companies and merged them with Hydro-Quebec.
    * Revenue for the Quebec government
    * Generated Jobs
    * Standardised electricity rate in the province
    * Construction of dams
* Cultural Affirmation
  * *Department of Cultural Affairs* *(1961)*
    * Promote Quebec's development in arts.
  * *Office de la langue Française* *(1961)*
    * Promote the French language in Quebec.
  * *Musée D'Art Contemparain* *(Contemporary Art Museum)* *(1965)*
    * Subsidised performance halls and museums to promote the spread of arts.
* Foreign Relations
  * Quebec established relations with other francophone countries.
    * Increased the number of francophone immigrants.
  * [General delegations](#general-delegation) in New York and London
    * Promote Quebec's economy and culture
    * Attract foreign investments
  * *Maison du Quebec* at Paris *(1961)*
    * Became the Quebec Government Office *(1964)*

### Modernisation of The State

* Reform of civil service
  * Academics and professionals were hired to raise the standard of quality.
  * Increase in employees in departments and boards
  * Anti-corruption measures
    * To ensure independence of decisions of civil servants
* New labour code *(1964)*
  * Right to bargain, unionise and strike to all workers.
* Electoral map redrawn *(1965)*
  * To fix disproportionate representation among electoral districts.
  * Number of districts and members of the Legislative Assembly increased to 108 from 95.

### *Union Nationale* in power *(1966-1970)*

* Election of Daniel Johnson *(1966)*
  
  * Supported modernisation started by the Lesage government.
* **CEGEPs** *(General and vocational colleges)* *(1967)*
  * Possibility of pursuing university or vocational training.
  * Allow Quebecers to be specialised in specific fields and pursue a higher education.
* *Université du Québec* network *(1968)*
  * More universities near remote areas for accessibility.
  * University training required for teachers.
    * Increase the quality and level of performance of teachers.
    * Moving towards a more secular staff.
* Some measures and laws adopted by *Union National*e  *(1966-1970)*
  | Year | Measure/Law                                        | Objective                                                    |
  | ---- | -------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
  | 1967 | *Société D'habitation du Québec*                   | Address the housing shortage and design low-rent housing programs for low-income people. |
  | 1967 | Québec Family Allowance Plan                       | Offer a sum of money to families to help them meet their children's needs. |
  | 1968 | Department of Immigration                          | Establish selection criteria to promote francophone immigration. <br />Establish reception services and linguistic and cultural integration centres for francisation of immigrants.<br/>Encourage immigrants to learn French. |
  | 1969 | A law granting Indigenous people the right to vote | Allow unrestricted voting for Indigenous people at provincial level. |
* *Bibliothèque Nationale du Québec* *(**BNQ**)* *(1967)*
  
  * Conserve and promote Québec's documentary heritage.
* Jean-Jacques Bertrand replaces Daniel Johnson *(1968-1970)*
  * Johnson died of an heart attack.
  * Manic-5 Dam renamed to *Barrage Daniel-Johnson* in memory of the former premier.
  * Focus on culture
    * Creation of *Place des Arts*
    * Radio Quebec/Tele Quebec
      * Opportunities for artists to display their work.
* *Act Respecting the Legislative Council of Québec* *(1968)*
  * Abolished the legislative council.
    * The legislative council was appointed by the governor.
  * Legislative assembly renamed to National Assembly.
* *Act to Promote the French Language in Québec* *(Bill 63)* *(1969)*
  * Allowed parents to choose the language of instruction for their children.
    * French as a second language courses in anglophone schools.
    * Integration of immigrants into francophone schools.
    * Many immigrant families sent their kids to English schools.
      * Since this act created French immersion programs in English schools.
  * Francophones wanted the French language to be more legally protected.

### Impact of the Quiet Revolution

* Education
  * Modernisation and democratisation of the education system increased school attendance.
    * Especially by women.
* Unions
  * Higher unionisation rate amount state employees *(after the new labour code of 1964)*.
    * Due to increase in civil servants.
    * *Confédération des Syndicats Nationaux* *(**CSN**)*: Largest union in Quebec
  * Better working condition and salary for public and parapublic employees. 
* Expo 67
  * World's Fair in Montreal
    * International exhibition to showcase the achievements of nations.
    * Hosted to display and demonstrate the modernisation of Québec.
    * Offered Quebecers and foreigners a chance to discover each other's culture and identity.
  * Presented
    * The modernisation of Québec
    * Technical, economic and artistic abilities of Québec.
      * Montréal Metro inaugurated before Expo 67.
    * The openness of Quebec.

### Quebec's Neo-nationalism

* Neo-nationalism: Change of Identity (re-birth of a form of nationalism)
  * Neo-nationalism shifts away from traditional values
    * Emphasised a stronger sense of belonging to the Québec territory.
  * Quebecers started to refer themselves as *Québécois* instead of *French Canadian*.
  * Idea of [sovereignty](#sovereignty) started to grow in Québec.
* Separatism
  * Government promotion of Québec's culture strengthened the growth of neo-nationalism.
  * Independence of several European colonies in the 1960s inspired Québécois sovereigntists.
  * *Ralliement National* *(**RN**)* and *Rassemblement Pour L'Indépendance Nationale* *(**RIN**)*
    * Separatist parties that promoted sovereignty.
    * Won 3.2% and 5.6% of the vote in 1966 provincial election.
* Charles de Gaulle at Expo 67: *vive le Québec libre*
  * Charles de Gaulle was the president of the French Republic
  * Declared that Québec should be a sovereign state.
    * Perceived as support for the Québec independence movement.
* *Parti Québécois* *(1968)*
  * René Lévesque left the Liberal Party to founds the *Mouvement Souveraineté-Association* *(**MSA**)*.
    * Wanted Québec as a sovereign country with economic ties with the rest of Canada.
  * The MSA, the Rn and most of the RIN merged to form the *Parti Québécois* *(1968)*

### Relations Between Québec and Ottawa

* PM Lester B. Pearson wanted to understand Québec's desire for affirmation.
  * Worried about the sovereignty movement of Quebec.
* The Three Wise Men
  * Jean Marchand, Pierre Elliott Trudeau and Gérard Pelletier
  * Invited to the federal Liberal Party by Pearson.
    * Recruited to pacify the tense relations between francophones and anglophones.
  * Also known as *The Three Doves* in French.
* *Royal Commission on Bilingualism and Biculturalism* *(Laurendeau-Dunton Commission)* *(1963)*
  * Studied the state of bilingualism and biculturalism.
    * Francophones did not have access to many jobs in the federal civil service since they were held by anglophones
    * Francophones were less privileged than anglophones in Québec in many perspectives (cultural, linguistic, economic).
  * Some recommendations of the commission
    * Creation of bilingual districts in regions where the minority community (francophone or anglophone) makes up more than 10% of the local population.
    * That parents be able to choose the language of instruction of their children where there is sufficient demand.
    * That Ottawa become a bilingual city.
    * Declaration of English and French as official languages of Canada.
* Election of Pierre Elliott Trudeau *(1969)*
  * The Trudeau government wanted to correct inequalities between francophones and anglophones by establishing a fair bilingualism policy.
  * *Official Languages Act* *(1969)*
    * English and French are made the official languages of Canada.

# Definitions

#### Welfare State

A state that intervenes socially and economically to improve the wellbeing of its population.

#### Pension

A portion of workers' salary that is collected. They grow in value over time and is returned upon retirement. 

#### Crown Cooperation

A state-owned organisations that exploit resources or provide services.

#### General Delegation

An organisation representing Quebec outside of Canada.

#### Sovereignty

The ability to govern themselves. (Independence from Canada).