# Quebec Society During the 1960s

### Demographic Change

* Major decline in birth rate *(1960s)*
  * Women were increasingly present in the labour market
    * Could no longer look after large families.
  * Access to birth control (birth control pill)
  * Less importance placed on traditional values such as having large families.
    * Smaller families and less children
* Diverse immigration and cultural communities
  * Gradual change in federal immigration policies
    * Withdrew measures that restricted immigration from non-western countries.
    * The labour market required professional qualification
    * Immigration criteria changed to be based on training and needs of the labour market
  * Source of immigrants
    * Mostly westerners. 
    * West indies, India, Pakistan and some other developing countries

### Expansion of The Consumer Society

* The consumer society became more widespread
  * Increase in purchasing power
    * Wages in Quebec increased more than prices
    * More goods became affordable
  * Growing variety of goods became available
  * New markets and products that were consumed to occupy leisure time.
  * Rapid increase in influence of consumer decisions by advertisement due to increased use of TVs.
    * Non-essential products are purchased

### Economic Growth

* Public Investment
  * Infrastructure required to modernise
    * New elementary and high schools
    * Roads, highways, bridges and dams
    * Hospitals
    * Public investment stimulated economic activity
* Housing Construction
  * Population growth lead to greater demand for housing.
  * Increase in purchasing power = people can afford houses
  * Many workers are hired to meet the demand for houses
    * Creation of jobs.
* Greater demand for manufactured goods and growth of housing construction
  * Increased purchasing power
  * Population growth
* Modernisation of industries
  * More automation in production to meet growing demands
    * Decline in job opportunities due to increased automation
    * Increase in production and profit
  * High modernisation cost
    * Large companies can afford modernisation
    * Small companies can not afford modernisation
      * Closed or bought out by larger companies
  * Many companies relocated from urban centres to suburbs
    * Cheaper land
    * Migration of workers to the suburbs
    * Construction of highways facilitated transportation of goods
* Relocation of businesses
  * Montreal -> Toronto
    * Ontario's economic growth was stronger than Montreal
    * Ontario is closer to the main consumer markets
    * Worried about the language laws in Quebec

### Development of [Urban Agglomerations](#urban-agglomerations)

* Quebecers were leaving big cities to settle in suburban municipalities *(such as Laval, Longueil and Sainte-Foy)*
  * Influence of US culture (American Dream)
  * Housing was more affordable
  * Highways allowed Quebecers to travel to suburbs
  * New factories were being built in suburbs
    * Access to jobs
* [Urban sprawl](#urban-sprawl)
  * Cities grow and expand into undeveloped land.
  * Increase in the amount of traffic (traffic jams)
  * Development of suburbs surrounded farmlands.

### Changing Attitudes

* Baby boomers
  * Baby boomers became adolescents and young adults in the 1960s
  * About 1.2 million youths turned 14 years of age.
    * The youth formed a very important social group within Quebec
    * Voting age reduced from 21 to 18 *(1963)*
  * [Counterculture](#counterculture)
    * Some baby boomers challenged traditional values openly.
    * Rejected values associated with the consumer society (such as martial success, materialism).
* Challenging traditional values
  * Many Quebecers abandoned traditional values
    * Decline in attendance to churches
    * Decline in religious community members (priests)
    * Decline in marriage and increase in divorce. 
      * A federal law allowed easier divorces *(1968)*
* Women's rights
  * *Act Respecting The Legal Capacity of Married Women* *(1964)*
    * Women could carry out financial transactions, sign legal documents without requiring their husband's consent.
  * *Fédération des femmes du Québec (**FFQ**)*  *(1966)*
    * Women's federation founded to advocate for women's rights
    * Abortion was considered a criminal act under the *Criminal Code*.
    * Abortion was allowed under certain circumstances with certain restrictions *(1969)*
      * Permitted if a committee of three doctors deemed that the woman's life or health was in danger.
  * Marie-Claire Kirkland-Casgrain
    * First woman elected to the Legislative Assembly of Quebec *(1961)*
      * Appointed as a minister in the Lesage government *(1962)*
      * Responsible for the two acts related to women's rights.
    * Left politics to pursue a career as a judge *(1973)*
* Decriminalisation of homosexuality
  * Bill C-150 *(Omnibus Bill)* *(1969)*
    * Bill that decriminalised homosexuality and removed it from the *Criminal Code*.
    * Despite the adoption of the bill, there was still discrimination towards homosexuals in workplaces and in establishments across cities in Canada.

### Indigenous Nations

* [White Paper](#white-paper) on the *Statement of the Government of Canada on Indian Policy* *(1969)*
  * Proposed the withdrawal of the *Indian Act* and Indian status.
    * Abolition of previous legal documents and treaties between First Nations and Canada.
    * Transformation of land of reserves into private property.
    * Transfer of responsibility of social services to the provinces.
    * Indigenous people would be considered Canadians without special consideration.
  * Opposition from Indigenous nations
    * Believed that they would harm their [ancestral rights](#ancestral-rights) and threaten their land claims.
    * Saw the proposal as an effort to assimilate them.
    * The opposition forced the federal government to drop its proposals.

# Definitions

#### Urban Agglomerations

A locality comprising a large city and its suburbs.

#### Urban Sprawl

The expansion of an urban territory to the periphery of a city.

#### Counterculture

A fringe cultural movement that opposes the dominant culture.

#### White Paper

A document that presents government proposals and policy direction in order to promote public debate.

#### Ancestral Right

A right derived from a practice or culture belonging to the culture of an Indigenous nation.

