# Quebec Society Under The Bourassa Government *(1970-1976)*

### Quebec Under Robert Bourassa

* Health care
  * Health care was limited to hospitalisation.
  * *Health Insurance Act* *(1970)*
    * Free medical services for all Quebecers
    * Creation of Medicare cards
  * *Centres locaux de services communautaires* *(**CLSC**)* *(1974)*
    * Local clinics that provided health services for all Quebecers.
    * Reduce wait times in hospitals.
    * Free standard health and social services
      * Such as vaccination and home care for seniors.
* *Quebec Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms* *(1975)*
  * Recognised that all individuals are equal.
  * Promote diversity in Quebec
  * *Quebec Human Rights Commission* *(1976)*
    * To ensure that the rights outlined within the Charter are promoted and respected
    * Provides information to the public through publications
    * Invests in cases of discrimination
* Hydroelectric development
  * *Project of the Century*
    * Plan to create a series of hydroelectric dams in the James Bay area
    * Wanted hydroelectricity to become the backbone of Quebec's economy.
    * Implemented over three phases, which spanned over 40 years. 

### Greater Indigenous Self-determination

* Indigenous [self-determination](#self-determination) movement
  * Indigenous people wanted to govern themselves
    * Current government was not considering their needs and they wanted more autonomy.
* Governance among Indigenous Nations

  |                           | First Nations                                                | Inuits                                                       |
  | ------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
  | Local Government Type     | Band council                                                 | Northern village council                                     |
  | Composition of Government | A chief and councillors                                      | A mayor and councillors                                      |
  | Form of Representation    | Election through [universal suffrage](#universal-suffrage) or representation based on custom | Elected through universal suffrage every two years           |
  | Role of Government        | Play political role, oversees administrative duties, education and health | Assumes the same responsibilities of municipalities (Local government) |

  \* The table represents governance based on the most common elements. Many nuances and local community and cultural variations exist.
* Political self-determination among Indigenous peoples
  * *Native Council of Canada* *(1970)*
  * *Native Alliance of Quebec* *(1972)*
    * New generation of Indigenous leaders
  * Nisga'a of British Columbia were the first Indigenous people to ask the Supreme Court to recognise their ancestral land rights.
    * The Supreme Court ruled against this claim.
  * *Office of Native Claims* *(1974)*
    * More efficiently manage Indigenous land claims
* *James Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement* *(1975-1976)*
  * The larger hydroelectric projects planned in Baie-James transformed the territories of the Indigenous people established there.
  * Issues between Hydro-Quebec and Inuit/Cree communities
    * Threat to the way of life of Inuit/Cree communities (culture/land claims)
    * Hunting and fishing grounds were at risk of being taken away
    * Indigenous groups were not consulted when the Bourassa government decided to create hydroelectric dams in the James Bay region.
  * The Indigenous peoples who lived in Baie-James (Inuit/Cree) asked the Superior Court of Quebec to order the work stopped.
    
    * The Quebec government agreed to negotiate with the Indigenous peoples *(1975)*
* Details of the agreement
  
    | Signatories                                                  | Main Agreements                                              |
    | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
    | The Inuit and the Cree of Baie-James<br />Governments of Quebec and Canada<br />James Bay Development Corporation<br />James Bay Energy Corporation<br />Hydro-Quebec | Protection of the culture and traditional way of life of the Inuit and the Cree<br />Creation of two school boards that take into account the particular cultural aspects of the Inuit and the Cree in developing the education program<br />Concession of exclusive hunting and fishing rights to Indigenous peoples in certain parts of the territory<br />Recognition of the right of Indigenous peoples to self-government through the creation of autonomous political institutions<br />Financial compensation of approximately $225 million to Indigenous peoples<br />Recognition of the role of Indigenous peoples in the exploitation and environmental management of the natural resources in Quebec's Far North<br />Resumption of hydroelectric construction<br />Opportunity for the government to exploit mining, hydroelectric and forest resources in the region. |

### October Crises *(1970)*

* Growth of the *Front de libération du Québec* *(**FLQ**)*
  * Demands Quebec sovereignty through violent revolutionary means.
* The FLQ targeted what they considered to be symbols of British colonialism
  * Planted bombs in mailboxes in Anglophone-majority neighbourhoods and at the Montreal Stock Exchange
  * Kidnapped politicians
    * British diplomat James Richard Cross *(October 5, 1970)*
    * Liberal minister Pierre Laporte *(October 10, 1970)*
* Pierre Elliott Trudeau invoked the *War Measures Act* *(1970)*
  * Allowed the government to take exceptional measures to bring the situation under control.
    * Military was used as a police force and patrolled the streets of Montreal
    * Police could arrest without warrants
    * Any suspects could be put in jail until they were proven innocent
      * Many wrongful arrests
* End result
  * Pierre Laporte found dead *(October 17, 1970)*
    * Abductors arrested *(December, 1970)*
  * James Richard Cross's kidnappers agreed to release him
    * In exchange for a [safe conduct](#safe-conduct) to Cuba.
  * Remaining members of the FLQ were arrested.

### Socio-political And Economic Tension *(1970s)*

* *The Common Front* *(1972)*
  * Three unions: FTQ, CEQ and CSN.
    * *Corporation des enseignants du Quebec* *(confederation of teachers)*
    * *Federation des travailleurs du Quebec* *(federation of workers)*
    * *Confederation des syndicats nationaux* *(confederation of national unions)*
  * Grievances with employers
    * Working conditions were worse than those in the private sector (hours, benefits, salary)
    * Reduce the gap between the economic advantages of public and private employees.
  * All three unions went on strike *(1972)*
    * 21000 workers
    * To put pressure on the provincial government to make changes to their working conditions
    * Leaders of the three unions imprisoned
* Oil Crises (OPEC Crises)
  * Yom Kippur War *(October 1973)*
    * Between a coalition of Arab countries and Israel
  * *Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries* *(OPEC)*
    * Raised the price of oil per barrel and dropped its production
    * To weaken Western countries that supported Israel
      * Especially the US
    * Lead to economic recession in many Western countries.
    * Consequences for Canada and Quebec
      * Oil shortage and increase in price of oil
      * Increase in the cost of transportation and goods
      * Economic instability, inflation and reduced purchasing power
* Feminist demands
  * *Report of the Royal Commission on the Status of Women in Canada* *(Bird Report)* *(1970)*
    * Revealed that women are subjected to many injustices.
      * Less pay than men
      * No right to abortion (still in Criminal Code)
      * No maternity leave
      * No child care services
  * Child care policy *(1974)*
  * Government agencies created
    * *Council on the Status of Women* *(1973)*
    * *Canadian Research Institute for the Advancement of Women* *(1976)*
  * *Front de Liberation des Femmes* *(1970)*
    * Radical feminist group, inspired by socialism and anti-colonial struggles
    * Women are considered colonised people
      * They should lead a liberation struggle against oppression
    * Aligned with the sovereignty movement for Quebec
      * Considered to be inseparable from women's liberation
  * Women started to make their mark on Quebec culture (movies, music, TV, literature).
    * Claire L'Heureux-Dube
      * First woman to be appointed as a judge to the Superior Court of Quebec and the Supreme Court of Canada.
    * Emergence of feminist press and literature
      * Newspaper: *Quebecoises deboutte!*
      * Magazine: *Les tetes de pioche*
      * Fictional work: *L'Euguelionne*
        * Considered the first Quebecois feminist novel.

### Federal-Provincial (Quebec) relations

* PM Trudeau wanted Canada to have its complete autonomy from the UK.
  * Planned the [patriation](#patriation) of the constitution
  * Wanted to establish an [amendment formula](#amendment-formula)
  * Wanted a strong central central (federal) government and was not a believer in provincial autonomy.
* In order to patriate the constitution, all provinces in Canada must agree on the division of power in Canada.
  * Some provincial governments were not willing to give up their autonomy.
* *Victoria Conference* *(1971)*
  * Constitutional negotiations between Ottawa and the provinces.
  * Resulted in a failure
    * The Quebec government opposed the proposed agreement
      * Believed that it would not enjoy the same autonomy in certain jurisdictions as it did under the Canadian Constitution (before).

### A Stronger Sense of Identity

* Concerns for francophones
  * Immigrant families prefer to send their children to English schools as they felt that English offered greater opportunities in the business world.
  * French language was considered to be at risk
  * Wanted immigrants to use French as their first language other than their mother tongue
* *Official Languages Act* *(Bill 22)* *(1974)*
  * French became the province's only official language
  * Limited access to English schooling
    * Only children with a good knowledge of the English language could attend English schools.
  * Francophones felt that the law was in adequate
    * Wanted immigrant families to send their kids to French schools.
    * To protect the French language in the province
  * Anglophones and [allophones](#allophones) considered it discriminatory
* Politically engaged artistic movements
  * Theatre troupes were playing in more and more performance halls in Quebec
    * Advocated for women, the regions, workers and the unemployed
    * Characterised by works of politically engaged filmmakers
      * Produced documentary-like films
  * Music artists were performing on outdoor stages and at special events.
    * Attracted many spectators each year to see a wide variety of artists
  * Overtime, artists took a stronger position on social questions and issues.
    * Particularly regarding Quebec's political future.
    * Artists expressed their commitment to nationalism
      * Many also supported Quebec sovereignty


# Definitions

#### Self-determination

The right of a people to determine the form of government that best suits their needs.

#### Universal Suffrage

Electoral system that extends the right to vote to all citizens of voting age. 

#### Safe Conduct

Permission given by an authority to allow an individual to go to a destination without fear of being arrested.

#### Patriation

Transfer of the control of a constitution from a mother country to its former colony.

#### Amending Formula

Procedure to be followed in order to amend the Constitution

#### Allophone

(In Canada) a person whose mother tongue is neither French nor English
