# Quebec society under Levesque *(1976-1980)*

### Election of Parti Quebecois

* 1976- The election of the Parti Quebecois marked the first time that a political party sought sovereignty from Canada attained power.
  * Rene Levesque was the leader of Parti Quebecois.
  * Won 41% of the vote and Rene Levesque became the Premier of Quebec
  * Promised to consult with the population about sovereignty
    * But first wanted to prove that it would be able to govern effectively
  * Promised to hold a [referendum](#referendum).
    * On Quebec separating from Canada.

### Affirmation of a Multicultural Society

* First policy promoting multiculturalism *(1971)*
  * Aimed to create equality among different cultural groups in Canada
  * Recognise indigenous rights, and the status of both official languages.
* *Immigration Act* *(1976)*
  * Broadened eligibility for entry into Canada for immigrants that have family in Canada.
    * Anyone is allowed into the country (no longer discriminatory).
    * *Canada used to favour people from Europe and the US*.
  * Aimed to help [refugees](#Refugees).
  * Promoted the arrival of immigrants that were financially supported by family members.
* Levesque government signed an agreement with the federal government *(1978)*
  * Allowed Quebec to determine the number of immigrants it wished to receive and select them.
  * Prioritised immigrants from French speaking regions *(Haiti, Algeria, Morocco)*.
    * Many Haitians flee from a dictatorship and arrived in Quebec.
* Sponsorship program *(1979)*
  * Allowed 8000 Vietnamese refugees into the province
* Quebec became a very diverse province in part to the immigration policies that were implemented during this time.

### Greater Protection of The French Language

* Quebecers worried about losing the French language.
  * Believed that the *Official Language Act* should be amended.
* *Charter of French Language* *(Bill 101)* *(1977)*
  * Continuation of *Bill 22*.
  * Required children of immigrants to attend to a francophone school until the end of high school.
  * Impose French (as primary language) on commercial and public signs.
* Many anglophone Quebecers and allophones were upset about the bill
  * Believed that the new legislation threatened their rights.
  * Feared that they could not integrate into society.
  * Many decided to leave the province and settle in the rest of Canada
    * Toronto became a popular destination for people and businesses.
    * Roughly 9000 anglophones left in five years following the passing of the bill.

### New Reforms

* Relations between unions and Bourassa had been very strained.
  * Unions generally supported Parti Quebecois because it was sensitive to their demands.
* Parti Quebecois adopted the *Rand Formula* *(1977)*
  * Required employers to collect union dues*.
* *Act Respecting Labour Standards* *(1979)*
  * Required employers to respect rules and conditions regarding to their employees.
    * Applies to non-unionised workers as well.
* *Automobile Insurance Act* *(1977)*
  * Provided compensation to victims of road accidents.
* *Act Respecting Labour Standards*
  * Granted maternity leave for female employees.
* Feminists also demanded more political representation.
* *Act to Govern the Financing of Political Parties* *(1977)*
  * Prevent favouritism and increase transparency in political fund raising or financing.
  * State assumed more responsibilities for election expenses.
  * Companies, unions and lobby groups could not contribute money to campaigns.
  * Maximum contribution of 3000$ in campaigns.
  * Contributions of more than 100$ required public naming of the donor.

### Protection of Agricultural Lands

* Urban agglomerations caused an outcry against the growing threat to farmland.
  * 2% of the land in Quebec was considered good for agriculture.
    * Mostly in Saint Laurence River Valley.
  * Many farmers started to sell their land to developers for significant profits.
* *Act Respecting the Preservation of Agricultural Land* *(1978)*
  * Zoning restricted the use of land and protected fertile soil.

### Economic Downturn

* The economy declined and unemployment increase.
* A second oil crises occurred in Iran
  * Fuel price increased > Increase in transportation costs > Increase in price of goods > Inflation
  * Many companies suffered economic losses
    * High unemployment rates in Quebec
  * Federal and provincial government raised taxes to support social programs.
* Industrial relocation gradually occurred.
  * Saw an increase in jobs being shipped to other countries with lower wages in order to maximise profits.
  * Job loss and less tax revenue
* Quebec and Ottawa raised taxes and went in debt.
* Some proposed shrinking the size of government
  * Less government spending on services and employees.
  * Loss of jobs.

# Definitions

#### Referendum

A vote where the population makes a decision, the decision is made if over 50% of the votes agree on one side.

#### Refugees

People escaping from wars, conflicts or natural disasters.