# Laurier's Liberal Government

### Canada's Status in the British Empire

* Political tension in the Dominion
  * [British Imperialism](#british-imperialism) vs. French Canadian Nationalism
  * British Imperialists
    * Believe that English should be the only language in Canada and Protestantism should be the only religion in Canada.
  * French Canadian Nationalists
    * Believe that they needed to protect their language and culture in Canada.
* Laurier's solution: Canadian Nationalism
  * Laurier's policy of compromise
    * Unite British Imperialists and French Canadian Nationalists under one common identity (Canadian).
      * Have more autonomy from the UK
        Allow for the development of a Canadian identity as it would move away from British Imperialist views.
      * Refused to join the British Imperial Council.
* Boer War *(1899 - 1902)*
  * The UK vs Boers (Dutch Colonists) in South Africa over gold deposits.
  * Canada had to participate in the conflict because the UK controlled its external affairs.
    * Laurier's perspective: voluntary enlistment
      * He was focused on developing the Canadian Identity and autonomy.
    * Bourassa (French Canadian Nationalist)'s perspective: against conscription
      * Does not want the French Canadians to fight on the UK's behalf.
    * British Imperialists wanted conscription
      * Felt that it is their duty to help the UK.
    * Result
      * Voluntary enlistment
      * Only British Imperialists volunteered.

### Creation of the Canadian Navy

* The UK wanted to increase their military defence
  * Proposed to create a Canadian Navy.
* Opposition from French and English Canadians
  * The French Canadians felt that they would be involved in all of the UK's conflicts.
  * The English Canadians wanted to provide direct financial assistance to the UK instead.
* Canadian Navy was created *(1910)*. 

### Immigration Policy

* Macdonald's *National Policy* -> Laurier's Immigration Policy
  * Focus: Populate and settle the west through immigration
  * Strategies
    * Free land and passage.
    * *(New!)* Immigration offices in countries that has demand for emigration.
      * Recruit people to immigrate to Canada.
    * *(New!)* Posters and brochures to convince people to immigrate to Canada. (In their local language)
      * Targeted people who were poor and didn't own land.
  * Origin of immigrants
    * The UK, USA, Eastern Europe, Western Europe, Scandinavia.
* Effects of immigration policy on Canada
  * Demographics of the population
    * Canada's population became more diverse
  * Territories
    * Creation of Alberta and Saskatchewan *(1905)*

### Impact of Immigration in Western Canada

* Rise of [xenophobia](#xenophobia) in the west.
  * Prairies (Alberta, Manitoba, Saskatchewan):
    * Canadians feared that Eastern Europeans would be a threat to their culture and way of life.
    * They mistreated them.
  * British Columbia:
    * Vandalised and destroyed the property of Chinese and Japanese immigrants.
    * Canadians saw them as a threat.
* Federal government's restrictive measures on Asian immigrants.
  * Chinese head tax ($100 in 1900) 
    * Raised to $500 in 1903.
  * 400 Japanese immigrants/year limit (1908)

### Francophone Catholic Minorities

* More immigrants in Canada
  * Demographics: French Canadian became more of a minority.
  * Education outside of Quebec
    * Manitoba: *Laurier-Greenway Compromise* *(1897)*
      * Allow French instruction in classrooms with 10 or more francophone students.
    * Alberta and Saskatchewan
      * French institution was tolerated in the early years of education (elementary).
    * Ontario: *Regulation 17* *(1912)*
      * French institution was allowed in the first two years of elementary school.
    * Ontario: *Regulation 17 ~~Mk. 2~~* *(1927)* (Amendment)
      * French institution could be given in all grade levels in school with francophones.
* Political tension between Quebec and the Federal government.
  * Bourassa promoted French Canadian nationalism and felt that the federal government was not protecting French Canadian rights in Canada.
    * He felt that other provinces in Canada were not protecting francophone rights.
    * He felt that the provincial laws outside of Quebec were attempting to assimilate francophones.

### Indigenous People in The Early 20th Century

* Residential Schools
  * Increase in number.
  * 1st residential school in Quebec *(1934)*.
  * Living conditions
    * Poor, malnutrition, physical and sexual abuse, poor housing condition.
* Government control
  * Placement of Indian agents on reserves.
    * To monitor and control the decisions made in band councils.
  * *Indian Act ~~Mk. 2~~* *(1927)* (Amendment): land claims
    * Indigenous people could not hire a lawyer to argue land claims on their behalf.
    * The Federal government could take their land as they please.
* Inuit population
  * Maintained their way of life.
    * The government had no interest in their land.
    * Allowed the Inuit to keep their nomadic way of life (hunting and fishing)
  * Not included in *Indian Act*.
    * No access to medical services and financial support from the government
    * Inuit people were struck by poverty and famine
    * They were included in the *Indian Act* *(1939)*
      * So they can receive medical services and financial support.

# Definitions

#### British Imperialism

(In the Dominion of Canada) Feel an attachment to its previous mother country (the UK). The belief in one group's domination over another group in culture, economy, military, etc. 

#### Xenophobia

Hostility or fear toward people of foreign origin.