# Transformation of Society in The Beginning of The 20th Century

### Union Movement

* Purpose of unions

  * Defend workers' rights
  * Improve their working conditions, salary and hours

* Influence of American unions

  * 40 unions across Quebec
    * Knight of Labour had a presence in Quebec
    * No Canadian/Quebec unions created as of the early 1900s

* Labour Legislation

  * Issues between employees and employers

    * Employers did not recognise some unions at first
    * Difficult to improve working conditions

  * Department of Labour *(1900)*

    * Created to resolve conflicts between employers and employees

  * New Regulations

    | Year | Act                                         | Description                                                  |
    | ---- | ------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
    | 1909 | *Worksmen's Compensation Act*               | Compensation to employees injured during work of up to 50% of their salary. |
    | 1910 | *Employment Bureau Act*                     | Offices created to help workers find jobs.                   |
    | 1926 | Amendments to *Worksmen's compensation Act* | Employer are insured so they can compensate workers even if their companies shut down<br />Compensation to employees up to |

* Strikes and strikebreakers

  * Employees go on strike to protest against low wages/poor working conditions
    * Especially when employers refused to recognise unions.
  * Strikebreakers
    * Police were called in to protect strikebreakers who were threatened by the employees on strike.

### Social Actions of The Catholic Church

* Social doctrine of the Catholic Church
  * Role in society: education, healthcare and charities
    * Intervened when they felt that the society was not respecting their role/presence
  * Concerns
    * The unions disrupted social order
      * Strikes were considered violent and immoral
    * unions were secular
    * Poor working conditions and social inequalities would disrupt social order
  * Creation of social doctrines
    * Accept the presence of unions but they make their own union
    * Reduce social inequalities and poverty in Quebec through Catholic unions
* Creation of Catholic unions
  * CCCL: First Catholic union
    * Believed that other unions promoted [socialism](#socialism)
    * CCCL would try to increase its presence by convincing French Canadians to leave American unions.
  * *Ecole Sociale Populaire*: Members of the Clergy and laypeople who made sure that Catholics were following the social doctrine of the Catholic church.
* The Catholic Church and its [cooperatives](#cooperative)
  * Popular in rural areas, farmers pooled their resources together to make it easier to get loans from banks in order to create their cooperatives.
  * *Union Catholique des Cultivateurs* (Catholic Farmers Union) *(1924)*
    * Promoted the spread of the cooperative movement in the agriculture sector.
* Alphose and Dorimene Desjardins
  * Created the Desjardin Bank
    * People with their bank are considered shareholders in the bank.
    * Created for farmers in rural areas who often had their loan proposals rejected by banks in urban areas.

### Urban Areas in Montreal

* Effects of the second phase of industrialisation on the urban areas (issues)
  * High population density
  * Epidemics
  * Lacked proper infrastructure (sewage systems, running water)
  * High infant mortality rate
* Government programs and new infrastructure
  * Chlorination *(purifying)* of water
  * *Gout de Lait* program: pasteurised milk for new-borns
  * Garbage collection: sewage system, running water

### Education System and Women's Struggles

* Issue in the education system for francophones
  * School attendance was not mandatory
  * Many children dropped out early to work and support their families
  * Women could not pursue higher education
* Education measures implemented during the 20th century
  * Vocational schools (trade schools)
    * Forestry, agriculture and business administration
* Feminism
  * Five main feminist demands
    * Right to vote
    * Right to run for office
    * Access to higher education
    * Better employment opportunities and better wages
    * Gender equality
  * Marie Lacost Gerin-Lajoie
    * Feminist writer
      * Published *A Treatise on Everyday Law*
    * Advocate of women's rights (legal status)
    * Raised women's awareness that their legal status was inferior
  * Suffragettes and Idola Saint-Jean
    * Growth of women's suffrage movement
    * Fought to get women's right to vote
      * Federal elections: 1918
      * Women's right to vote in provincial elections was not given because the Catholic Church opposed it.
    * Saint-Jean fought for women's right to vote in Quebec.
  * Eva Circe-Cote and the labour market
    * Women did not have the same employment opportunities as men.
    * They were paid significantly less.
    * Circe-Cote was an advocate for gender equality in the work force.

# Definitions

#### Strikebreaker

A person hired to perform the duties of a worker on strike.

#### Socialism

An ideology that defends the interests of the majority rather than the specific interests of smaller groups. Socialists believe that an interventionist state is required to ensure this.

#### Cooperative

Organisation that promotes collective management and profit sharing. Created by a group of people pooling their resources. All members share the same amount of profit.