# World War I

### Historical Context

* Triple Entente: UK, France, Russia
* Central Powers: Germany, Austria-Hungary, Ottoman Empire
* Assassination of Franz Ferdinand, Arch-duke of Austria-Hungary
  * By a Serbian nationalist Gavrilo

### Wartime Federal Government

* Canada automatically joins the war because the UK controlled its external affairs.
* *War Measures Act* *(1914)*
  * All factories/industries must produce goods for the war effort (weapons, uniforms)
  * Price of goods and wages were controlled by the government
  * Imposed censorship
    * To control the information being given to the public
* Xenophobia during the war
  * Immigration policy
    * Closed for immigrants *(1914)*
      * Feared that war would come to Canada
      * Feared enemy spies
  * Internment Camps (Abitibi)
    * Isolate Canadians who's ancestry could be linked to an enemy country.
    * Rights and citizenship were revoked temporarily.
    * Poor living conditions (housing and nutrition).

### Canada's War Effort

* Wartime production benefited specific industrial sectors
  * Military Equipment (weapons, munitions, uniforms)
  * Agricultural industries (food for soldiers)
  * Shipbuilding (transport goods to Europe)
* Military forces
  * A large percentage of the population fought in WWI (~600k) (~7%)
  * Battle of Vimy Ridge
    * Turning point in WWI
    * Canadians took control of the ridge from Germany.
  * War (victory) Bonds
    * Canadians invested in the war effort to help the federal government
    * Canadians can cash in the bonds at any time and receive their money back and gain a portion of their money as interest.
  * Women's contribution
    * Replace men in factories: helped the war efforts by producing goods for the war
      * Prime Minister Borden gave women the right to vote in federal elections *(1918)*

### Conscription Crises

* British imperialism vs. French Canadian nationalism
  * British imperialists wanted conscription to support the UK overseas.
  * French Canadian nationalists were against conscription because they did not feel attachment to either the UK or France.
* Cause
  * Voluntary enlistment was very low
    * French Canadians refused to sign up.
  * The death toll in Europe was increasing by the day.
    * Soldiers were needed.
  * Military Service Act *(1917)*
* Anti-conscription rallies
  * Montreal: Peaceful rally protesting conscription.
  * Quebec city: 5 days of rioting
    * Federal government called in the military and imposed martial law.
      * Rights were restricted until the conflict is resolves.

### End of The War And Canada's Autonomy

* Impact of the Canadian military overseas = demand for greater autonomy
* League of Nations *(Feb. 1919)*
  * Canada was given its own seat (instead of a delegate of the UK).
  * The goal of League of Nations: world peace.
* Treaty of Versailles *(Jun. 1919)*
  * Canada signed as an independent nation.
* Balfour Report *(1926)*
  * Former British PM Author Balfour recommended to the current administration that Canada be given full autonomy.
* ~~Statue~~ Statute of Westminster *(1931)*
  * Canada gets control of its external affairs.
  * The UK reserved the right to amend their constitution.