# Inter-war Period

### [Mass Culture](#mass-culture)

* 1920s: Decade of mass culture
  * Post WWI = economic prosperity
    * People got money by cashing out victory bonds, saving money during the war and getting paid for being soldiers.
    * Exports remained high.
  * Development of entertainment
    * Creation of nightclubs due to Prohibition*(ban of alcohol)* in the US and Canada (except Quebec).
    * Radio stations
    * Movie theatres
    * Sports (hockey)
  * Mass consumption of goods
    * Society is buying products and services
      * Increased purchasing power
      * People had more money (higher salary).
    * New technology in households
      * Electricity in homes =  appliances being purchased
        * Fridges, stones, ovens

### ~~big sad~~ Great Depression

* Mechanisms of the Great Depression

  ```mermaid
  graph TD
  	A(Overproduction and accumulation)
  	B(Drop in prices)
  	C(Loss of investor confidence)
  	D(Drop in stock market values)
  	E(Business profitability issues)
  	F(Drop in production)
  	G(Layoffs and unemployment)
  	H(Weak consumer purchasing power)
  	
  	A --> B
  	B --> C
  	C --> D
  	D --> E
  	E --> F
  	F --> G
  	G --> H
  	H --> A
  ```

* Black Thursday: October 24th, 1929

  * Stock market crashed in New York City.
  * Start of the Great Depression
  * Social consequences
    * Poverty, unemployment rates increased
  * Economic consequences
    * Businesses closed (bankrupt)
    * Exports decreased
      * The US bought less goods from Canada

* Government believed that the economic situation would eventually fix itself (economic liberalism).

  * The Catholic Church intervened before the government.
  * They offered charity through soup kitchens and by offering shelter.

* Government intervention in society

  * *Public Works Program*
    * Offered jobs constructing infrastructure (roads, canals, railways).
  * *Direct Relief Program*
    * Cheques were sent to the population so they can afford essentials.
  * Creation of the Bank of Canada
    * To regulate currency.
  * *Office du Crédit Agricole* (Quebec)
    * Low interest loans given to farmers to try to stimulate production.

* Other interventions

  * *Bennett's New Deal*
    * Failed attempt at social and economic intervention in Canada
  * *Return to the Land* (Quebec)
    * Wanted francophones to live in the rural areas and focus on a rural economy.
    * Criticised the effects of industrialisation (poverty).
    * Colonised new region: Abitibi.

### Challenging Capitalism and Democracy

* Emergence of new political parties in Quebec
  * Quebecers criticised capitalism and saw it as the cause of the Great Depression.
  * [Communist](#communism) Party of Canada *(1921)*
  * Cooperative Commonwealth Federation (CCF) *(1933)*
    * [Socialism](#socialism)
  * National Social Christian Party (PNSC) *(1934)*
    * Lead by Adrien Arcand
    * [Fascism](#fascism)
  * Social Credit *(1935)*
    * [Populist](#populism)

### Maurice Duplessis and *Union Nationale*

* Elected as Premier of Quebec on the following principles *(1936)*
  * Promoted traditionalism and social conservatism
    * Belief in traditional and conservative values promoted by the Catholic Church.
    * Catholic Church controlled education and healthcare with little to no state intervention.
  * Wanted a rural economy and francophones living in the rural areas.
    * Blamed capitalism for the Great Depression.
    * Protect and preserve the French Canadian identity.
  * Sought to limit the power and influence of unions.
    * Believed that unions disrupted social order (strikes).
    * Police were called upon to disrupt strikes and arrest anyone who continued to strike.
* *Padlock Act (1937)*
  * Any establishments and businesses suspected of promoting or harbouring communists were closed with a padlock.

### [Clerico-nationalism](#clerico-nationalism)

* These factors led to the formation of clerico-nationalism.
  * Great Depression
  * Promotion of a rural economy in Quebec
* Promoted by Abbe Lionel Groulx (Priest)
  * Believed that it was essential to protect the French Canadian Identity and to promote provincial autonomy.
  * *Action Nationale*
    * Journal that publishes articles related to clerico-nationalism
    * Groulx was the biggest contributor.
  * Groulx VS. Bourassa
    * Point of disagreement: The national territory of the French Canadians
    * Groulx: Quebec
    * Bourassa: Canada
* *École Sociale Populaire*
  * Promoted a rural economy (cooperatives) after the Great Depression.
* Francophones in the economy
  * Initiative by francophones to take control of the economy from the anglophones in Quebec
  * Opened new businesses that were owned and operated by only francophones.



# Definitions

#### Mass Culture

Culture destined for a wide public.

#### Communism

Ideology that advocates the abolition of private property and the redistribution of wealth through common ownership of the means of production. The workers would gain power through revolution.

#### Socialism

Ideology that defends the interests of the majority rather than small groups. An interventionist state is required to enforce these rules.

#### Fascism

Ideology that advocates a totalitarian regime founded on extreme nationalism.

#### Populism

Ideology that criticises the elite and openly defends the interests of the people.

### Clerico-nationalism

French Canadian nationalism supported by the Catholic Church. Promotes traditional values, way of life and the preservation of the French Canadian identity. Quebec is seen as the national territory for all French Canadians. 