# World War II ~~: Electric Boogaloo~~

### Wartime Federal Government

* Canada declares war on Germany *(1939)*.
  * Statute of Westminster allowed Canada to make decisions regarding external affairs.
  * *War Measures Act* re-established
    * Censorship
    * Controlled prices and wages (economy).
    * Factories had to produce goods for the war effort.
    * Rationing of resources that were important for the war effort. (Fuel, metal, nylon, rubber)
* *National Resources Mobilisation Act*
  * The federal government called on single men to enlist on the army. (Not conscription.)
    * More single men were married to avoid military service.
  * Managed the production of munitions and goods needed for the war effort.
* Immigration policy: closed doors
  * Refused entry for Eastern European Jews seeking refuge from Germany.
* Wartime production
  * Increased spending = increased debt
    * Victory bond strikes back

### Conscription and Women's Contribution

* Idea of conscription was reintroduced *(1942)*
  * Death toll in Europe was increasing
  * [Plebiscite](#plebiscite) on conscription *(1942)*
    * Most Canadians wanted conscription.
    * The majority of the French Canadians opposed conscription.
    * Conscription was not imposed.
  * Conscription imposed *(1944)*
    * Caused tension between Quebec and the federal government
    * Quebec soldiers did not have to fight overseas, they coul djoin the Canada home defence instead.
* Women's contributions
  * Replaced men in factories.
  * Supportive roles in military (nurses, mechanics, etc.)
  * Financial autonomy
    * Women were able to keep the money that they had earned during the war.
      * Women were laid off after the war.
      * Demanded equal pay and job opportunities.

### Godbout Government *(1939-1944)*

* Godbout beat Duplessis based on a major promise of no conscription*(1939)*
  * He promised that he will resign if conscription was imposed by the federal government.
  * Godbout's liberal party was in charge of Quebec and sought to make widescale changes.
* Good relations with the federal government
  * Collected federal income tax from the population and received funds from the federal government to improve the province.
  * Allowed many federal interventions and taxes.
    * Criticised by Duplessis.
  * Measures
    * Unemployment insurance
      * Money given to a worker once they have been laid off.
    * Family allowance
      * Financial aid given to faimilies to support their children.
* Built on the principles of democratisation, modernisation and nationalisatoin.
  * Modernisation: wanted Quebec to progress and more foward (away from traditional values).
    * Women were given the right to vote in provincial elections *(1940)*
    * Mandatory school attendance until the age of 14 (up from 12).
    * Unemployment insurance
    * Labour Relations Act *(protected workers)*
  * [Nationalisation](#nationalisation)
    * The provincial government bought out Montreal Light Heat and Power
      * Creation of Hydro Quebec *(1944)*
* Return of Duplessis *(1944)*
  * Federal government imposed conscription.
  * Francophones lost trust of the liberal party.
    * Duplessis won the provincial election.

# Definitions

#### Plebiscite

A vote regarding a problem that the federal government is not legally obligated to follow.

#### Nationalisation

The government takes control of a specific industrial sector or industry by aquiring companies and establishing a monopoly.